---

author:
- Marco Rizzoli

date: 06-11-2016

bibliography: /home/mrizzoli/notes_src/biblio/biblio.bib

categories:
- essay

layout: post

tags:
- unionism
- hegemony
- passive revolution

link-citations: true

title: 'The Role of Labour Unions in Turkey’s Passive Revolution'

---


Introduction
============

The significant role of social movements for the democratization discourse is mainly due to their ability to play the role of watchdog regarding government's activities. In particular for its ability to reveal
governance practices not compatible to the rule of law and to help manage and prevent dissent. The degree of organizational solidarity between the actors of the civil sphere is a main factor in predicting their relative strength and therefore its freedom of acting and confronting the state in the political sphere. The pivotal role of labour unions in coordinating and improving the interrelations between social movements
can be ascribed to their organizational peculiarities and access to resources. As mass movements of workers, unions have the possibility to influence directly the productive sector, therefore they have the capability to exercise leverage on the government and entrepreneurs by means like strikes and collective bargaining. The possibility to organize collective protests and public manifestations of dissent represent forms of resistance against state coercion. Moreover the role in conveying labour force to the formal sector of economy and diverting dissent in legal and peaceful protests is a prerogative of well established
unions that can boost the overall performance of a country. Preventing (or at least limiting) informal employment that avoids taxation plays an important role in thwarting the drainage of state's finances. On the
other hand formal employment and collective bargaining practices raise security on the workplaces by forcing the employers to adhere to standards and collective contracts that also guarantee a higher income and social security.

The role of unions is also to include subordinate workers in civil society, so to allow them to participate in the dialectics with the political sphere as a collective unity, thus increasing their relative power in the interaction with hegemonic discourses. The democratic structure of its internal organization, with the election of worker’s representatives both as part of the union and in factory’s assemblies, strengthen the political awareness of their members and can induce them to get involved in political activities also out of the union. Defending interests and rights of the lower income subordinate workers has the goal to narrow income inequality so to promote social justice and improve self awareness of the subordinate classes.

The main traits conventionally used to define a state-like structure are its autonomy from other organizations acting on the same territory, its centralized and formally coordinated structure and its monopolistic control of the means of coercion and tax collection. It may also be different from the Nation since this is one of the means of legitimization of a state. The main trait that distinguish a
Nation is that its legitimizing discourse is based on a sense of commonality among its citizens, who share same cultural values, language and history. These traits can be pre-existent to the state or infused in
the subjects to legitimize the same existence of the state as a political entity. So a Nation can be a consequence of a state-making process but its not necessarily the only one [@tilly_formation_1975 pg 70].

Since we have conceptualized the state making as a process of imposing an organization’s structure over a territory, the means with which it imposes and legitimize its presence are the main characteristic that
distinguish between different kind of regimes, from democracy to dictatorship. The role of civil organizations and social movements in the realization of “full” democracies and its correlations between civil
freedoms are directly linked to the necessity for an autonomous condition of the civil society sphere. It is recognized that in cases of direct influence of state or political sphere on the social movements by
funding, sponsorships or providing ideological basis, the outcome can lead to Dictatorial forms, like in Italy and Germany before the 2nd World War but also it can contribute to the formation of strong patronage regimes when state’s leaders achieve to co-opt informal actors [@kwon_associations_2004; @vine_african_1980, @vine_nation-building_2008].

In the practice of state-crafting [@tilly_formation_1975 pg 70] there are counteracting factors that can challenge the establishment of a hegemonic discourse. Studies in developing countries in Africa [@vine_african_1980] and ex-soviet Union [@tilly_social_2005; @marat_state-crime_2006] recognize the presence of a strong informal sector of the economy as part of the forces that challenge the centralization and monopolization of the political and economic sphere. Actors in paralegal or illegal sectors of economy can build strong parallel networks, based on patronage, a possible outcome for this can be the cooptation of these actors in state’s structure (as happened for example in Tajikistan) but also they can successfully substitute the “official” government in areas/regions were it lacks the necessary strength to impose its presence (as partially happened in Kyrgyzstan). These processes are mostly studied in developing countries because of the higher visibility they have during state and nation building processes. We can see some similarity also in well established states, as a consequence of the introduction of neoliberalist economic policies. Following the main points outlined in the Washington Consensus paper the privatization of important sectors, like welfare system and of strategic resources, introduced new actors in the political and economical sphere. The intrusion of informal networks based on clientelism substituting the state in providing social security can be a serious challenge to democracy.

Social movements are seen as main players in the process of democratization and nation building [@tilly_social_2005; @ekiert_contentious_1998-1] (even if in many cases it would be better to refer to state crafting), in this paper I will focus on the role of labour unions in hindering the development of a strong informal sector by their mediation between the parts (workers and enterprises) and how this can prevent the dismemberment of state’s role along the application of neoliberalist discourses. In the specific case of Turkey I will scrutiny which role played the lack of strong unionism and integration between social movements in the cooptation of part of the Islamic civil society. Accordingly with Cihan Tuğal's analysis [see @tugal_passive_2009] this cooptation led to a redefinition of the hegemonic discourse exercised by the political sphere and eventually to a passive revolution.

Shaping Contemporary Turkish Unionism
=====================================

The history of labour unions in Turkey can be traced back to the early years of 19th century, and mostly it took the shape of mutual benefit institutions organized among different professions,  in particular in state owned companies and with strong ties with socialist movements. Long hiatuses characterized the story of unionism in Turkey and shaped its situation in the present, the first one was in 1925 with
the ban of all the political activities and the instauration of the single party regime, which lasted until 1946. Another distinctive trait of turkish labour unionism is its organization under umbrella institutions strongly tied to the government, as enunciated in the Associations Act of 1938 that was shaped on Mussolini’s corporatism and prohibited class based associations [@aslan_f._and_baydar_trade_1998]]. A new Act regulating labour and political associations was promulgated in 1947, that, although allowing the establishment of unions, prohibited protesting through strikes. In the following years the role of the
unions grew constantly both in the number of members and in acts of protests, even declaring illegal strikes.

The Democrat Party, who came to power in 1950 and was driven by a market oriented ideology, established new close relations with the U.S. and applied for the membership in the NATO. In 1952 one of the main unions in Turkey was founded: Turk Iş took the shape of an umbrella corporation meant to prevent the formation of strong class based associations of workers, strongly tied with the U.S. who were funding it from the very beginning. It also developed close ties with the leading party, as union members were granted parliamentary seats or prominent positions in public offices [@nichols_global_2004-1 pg 145]. After the military coup of 1960, a new constitution was signed granting basic freedoms for the labour unions, but it also included several limitations like the prohibition of political and general strikes. The main unions that are still active in contemporary Turkey were founded in this period. The success of collective protests organized by DISK, born by unions seceded from Turk Iş, increased the strength of worker’s movements and union membership grew through all the 1970s, as well as working hours affected by the protests [@nichols_global_2004-1].

The situation, though, worsened with the economic and political crises that led to the military coup of 1980: first the military junta banned all the federate and independent unions and then, in 1983, promulgated the new Trade Unions Act. Heavily restrictive measures meant to prevent the engagement of worker’s organizations in political activities and protests were adopted. The prohibition of collective bargaining in the public sector, to call for general strikes and the possibility for the government to delay or deny the permission to strike in case of emergency circumstances (obviously to be defined by the government itself) were some of the reforms introduced. Also new rules regarding application for membership were established, with a long and cumbersome procedure to comply to, that also required an expensive registration certified by a notary. The same rules were applied to resign from a union, and were especially effective to prevent the draining of members from accommodating unions, like for example the case of Turk Iş branch in the metallurgical sector (Türk Metal), where the procedure to join the union was included in the contract signed by the workers with the employer [@nichols_global_2004-1 pg 175]. Moreover the ban on the labour unions actually affected mostly the DISK, since the other two major unions were allowed again to operate soon after the coup: Turk Iş after few months and Hak-Iş (Islamic Federation) in 1981.

Even after the DISK came again in existence it faced the draining out of its former members and the imprisonment of its cadres, seriously undermining its effectiveness. The law ruling the possibility to participate in collective bargaining was in fact extremely restrictive, allowing only the unions representing at least 50% plus one of the employees in the workplace and 10% nationwide in the sector to be part
of the negotiation.

###Private sector's main unions in contemporary Turkey

#### Turk Iş

Founded in 1952 with the intention

> to establish new unions in those branches where no unions existed, to
> amalgamate the different unions in the same branch in each province,
> to combine trade unions in federations, to strive for the amendment of
> the Labour Code so as to cover all working people employed in
> industry, agriculture, commerce or elsewhere and to advocate the
> recognition of the right to strike to all workers. [@aslan_f._and_baydar_trade_1998]

Has since its very foundation been strictly intertwined with the government and the TISK (the confederation of Turkish’ employers) as testified by many of its members who were elected in the parliament or appointed to government offices, and explicitly admitted to have received fundings from the U.S. and Turkish government during the 4th congress held in Ankara in November 1960. After the military coup in
the ’80s, when was facing the challenge of the DISK, was the only union allowed to operate. As a consequence of its support to the military regime and the participation of its general secretary as Minister of
Labour it was expelled from the ICFTU (International Confederation of Trade Unions). As of January 2009 it's the biggest Turkish trade union with 2,239,341 members recorded officially by the statistics of the
Ministry of Labour and Social Security [@aslan_f._and_baydar_trade_1998]

#### DISK

Founded in the “golden age” of Turkish unionism (1960-1980), its core members were also part of the socialist oriented Workers Party of Turkey (TIP) and former members of Turk Iş, who during the strike in Pasabahce glass factory in 1966 formally seceded from Kristal-Iş (a branch of Turk Iş). The event that triggered the secession was the agreement with the TISK made by the union’s leadership who passed over the head of the workers involved in the protests. Gaining the support of other confederate unions Kristal-Iş members were able to resume the strike against the agreements signed by the confederate leadership and as a
consequence were expelled. A new confederate treaty posed the basis for the foundation of DISK. In the statement released to explain the secession from the confederation it was claimed that

> Türk-Is had become unable to implement its own principles, allowed a
> readjustment of the regulations on industrial branches in breach of
> international norms, lost its national identity and could only survive
> with American help, that it pursued a placatory policy that hindered
> workers in attaining their rights, opposed all justified strikes and
> supported the foundation of employer- friendly unions against
> Maden-Is. They declared that a new confederation was necessary to
> coordinate the struggle of individual unions for the common interests
> of the working people. The sole income of the new confederation would
> be workers’ dues and donations, and it would aim the establishment of
> a system of equality and fraternity in the country.[@aslan_f._and_baydar_trade_1998]

 DISK leaders faced numerous convictions and trials in the early ’70s due to their autonomous position that let them pursue aims like increasing women’s rights on the workplace. After the military coup in 1980 its leaders were again arrested and the union was banned until January 1992, when the 8th general assembly was held, after that the union successfully joined ICFTU and ETUC and participated in the Democratic Platform with the other major unions. Nowadays DISK counts 426,232 members and is the third Turkish union considering the number of supporters.

#### Hak-Iş

Founded in 1976 and posing as a mediator between employers and workers, Hak-Iş refuses communism, zionism and fascism and claim as its goal the establishment of harmonious relations in the workplace. Its religion
based ideology is well testified by the the mosque inside a crescent drawn in its original symbol. After the military coup was one of the first union who was allowed to function again in 1981. Its relations
with the National Salvation Party who governed as part of parliamentary coalitions let this union gain the support of the public sector related to the ministries under NSP’s control. In 1993 joined the Democratic
platform from which withdrew after the other unions opposed its proposal to participate in the privatization of state owned enterprises on the basis that if they were to be sold they should have be in the hands of the workers. In 1997 joined ICTFU and ETUC. In 2009 it counted 431,550 members and was the second union in Turkey.

The main feature of unionism in Turkey has been the constant attempt by the government to embed worker’s organization into the state apparatus in a corporate fashion, with strong reactions when the less restrictive law on Trade Union regulations and civil freedoms allowed the formation of links between social movements. What happened after the  “golden age" of unionism of the "’60s and ’70s with the military coup in 1980 that disbanded all the independent organization is one example. The strong ties with the government and employers can therefore be considered at the basis of the actual predominance of Turk Iş. Its collusion with the state, with employers' associations, and the ongoing clientelistic practices in its internal hierarchy in conjunction with legal constrains that effectively limit labour unions’ ability to operate can partially explain the contemporary disaffection of the workers.

Effectiveness of Unions in Contemporary Turkey
==============================================

The first half of the ’90s witnessed a general resurgence of union activity and protests, thanks to the less restrictive laws and to the re-establishment of previously banned organizations like DISK. Also the
three main unions representing public servants were founded. This is well reflected in the results of the World Values survey that in the aggregated table of the years between 1990 and 2001 records a cumulative
45,5% of positive answers (“quite a lot” and “great deal”) regarding people’s opinion on unionism and on the increasing number of participants in strikes that reached its peak in 1995 [@nichols_global_2004-1 pg
155]. The Democratic Platform was formed in 1993 with the goal to convey all the major unions’ efforts in collective bargaining. A general tendency of decreasing confidence in "effectiveness" and "importance of
labour unions in affecting workers’ conditions" is then recorded from 2002 with an overall drop to 38,5% in the above mentioned positive answers to the World Values survey in 2007.

This overall tendency is paralleled by the decreasing coverage of collective bargained contracts, with the decline from 46.9% of workers covered in 1985 to 18.3% in 2004 [@dinler_trade_2012-2 pg 10].This
numbers reflect the consequences of the Labour Law promulgated in 2003 that institutionalized fixed term and part time labour. The segmentation of labour force through the practice of subcontracting
and job agencies that act as intermediaries between workers and employers poses another challenge to the labour unions as it is often difficult and cumbersome to understand which contract is
applicable to the worker since there is a remarkable variation of the possible contexts of subcontracting thus leaving the workers in a sort of contractual limbo.

It is worth noticing that the laws regulating labour unions were the same approved under the military regime and lasted for 30 years. Just in 2012, on October 18th, a new law was promulgated which lowers the sector threshold to participate in collective bargaining to 3%, but keeps the workers’ representativeness in the workplace at 50% and the ban to general, political and solidarity strikes. Moreover it removes the
payment for workers dismissed for joining a union in case of companies with less than 30 employees or for workers employed for less than 6 months. In conjunction with the lack of a maximum number of consequent term contracts this can leave the workers hired with the new regulations without protection. Public servants were allowed to organize in unions only after 1995 and in specific case like judges and policemen it is still forbidden. The recognition of collective bargaining was ratified in 2010, and only disputes on income are allowed. The decisions are to be taken between a Commission of public employers and a Central Commission of employees made of seven members appointed from the main unions accordingly to the rate of membership. It is not clear if the decisions are to be made with the majority of votes or it is sufficient the President’s approval, but since four out of six members plus the president are appointed from the most representative union (now the MEMUR-SEN, the closest to the government) the internal democracy of the Commission and subsequently the effective representativeness of public servants is strongly debatable.

Accordingly to the report drafted by ITUC in February 2012 [@ituc_internationally_2012], even if Turkey has ratified the eight core Labour Conventions, the country still doesn’t comply with the agreements signed. Regarding the case of workers’ and unions’ rights is stated that harassment against unionised workers is present in the workplaces and discrimination practices also with the use of violence are not enough discouraged by the existing laws and their application. Among the cases reported the most striking are those regarding judicial harassment:

> Several trade unions have faced criminal charges under false or vague
> allegation, including setting up “terrorist organizations”.

many of them were sentenced to prison under these accusations, like 25 KESK members of Kurdish origins who were charged for “intellectual support to terrorist organizations” and convicted for six years, or the
case of the union leader of KESK’s teachers branch who was threatened of dismissal after he denounced the use of child workers in Şanliurfa. Dismissals after unionisation in factories are common practice along
with the pressure on workers to join more malleable and accommodating unions (or none at all) under the threat of mass firings and relocation of structures.

Islamic Unionism and Turkey’s Passive Revolution 
=================================================

The changes in Hak-Iş policy and members composition can be emblematic of the processes that affected Islamic based social movements after the 1980 military coup. From its beginning this labour union focused on a religious basis for its ideology, in strong contrast with the other unions it posed itself in the position of offering a peaceful confrontation between employers and employees who are seen as part of the same Islamic community, and should therefore act in harmony. During the military regime this union soon supported the government and gained the possibility to start again its activism as early as the beginning of 1981. The main goals of the Islamic union have been to establish a feeling of brotherhood between workers and enterprises, and its main claims in the negotiations were about the creation of spaces dedicated to the prayers or to gain days off for pilgrimages. The turning point of the movement and the beginning of its inclusion into the dominant position can be traced soon after the end of the military regime.

During the 4th general assembly Hak-Iş's new leader Necati Çelik, elected in 1983, detached the union’s position from the Welfare Party, born from the ashes of MNP who was banned by the military, in 1986 also the idea of Islamic community as the basis for negotiations between employer-employees was deleted from the statute [@duran_islamism_2005]. The new direction improved the appeal of Hak-Iş among workers who previously were member of DISK. Ironically, and obviously thanks to the ongoing ban on DISK, during the late ’80s the once conservative and religious Hak-Iş was substituting the role of the most leftist union in Turkey. This change is further testified by Hak Iş's new symbol which also incorporated a flywheel next to the crescent. With the expansion of its membership also its goals begun to get broader, for example supporting the claims for the improvement of civil rights and democratization, it took a further shift to more “traditional” union practices by organizing a general strike in 1991 and participating in the celebration of International Labour Day on the 1st of May of the same year. In the same period Hak-Iş assembly added the words “secularism” and “democracy” to its statute with the goal to obtain an international recognition by ICFTU and ETUC, achieving both of them in 1997. This interest in international relations also changed drastically its position about the admission of Turkey in the European Union, now actively supporting it. The last traces of syncretism between Islamic values and unionist practices took a shape similar to Islamic charities in Hak-Iş policies, promoting the provision of social services to workers, like healthcare and childcare. Also its way to deal with the privatization of state’s factories by buying them in the attempt to develop a model of employee-based ownership (in the shape of cooperatives) was an unconventional way to address the issue of increasing market hegemony. In this sense the transformations undertook by Hak-Iş after the military coup and the first introduction on neoliberalism in Turkey shaped it in the way of universal provisionism, encompassing all the spheres of social welfare that once belonged to the state:

> Hak-Iş might be considered the forerunner of the Muslim democratic
> leaning of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), which voices
> strong statements about the expansion of the sphere of politics
> regarding freedoms and human rights. AKP’s intention of joining
> European Union is again in parallel with Hak-Iş’s European
> inclinations [@duran_islamism_2005 pg 242]

Conclusion
==========

After the military coup of 1980 and the introduction of neoliberalism the aim of Islamic associations, networks and parties shifted to the realization of the concept of integral religion, an all-encompassing
Islam, regulating people’s lives, trying to institute alternative lifestyles, places and economic relations. The same transformation in the political discourse of the Hak-Iş in conjunction with the declining
role of unionism during late ’90’s can be read as part of an attempted adaptation to the application of neoliberalist policies and the subsequent commodization of everyday life, that established intertwined
relations between market needs and the state through the political sphere and realized in the workplaces in the form of *market despotism*.

Paraphrasing Tuğal’s words [@tugal_passive_2009], how was possible that liberal neoconservatism appropriated bits and pieces of Islamic political society and civil society after 2002 to reinstitute the linkages of economy, civil society, political society and the state, and had as an outcome the absorption into the AKP of Islamist cadres and strategies?

In Tuğal’s interpretation the main actor in passive revolution’s reconstruction of hegemony is the sphere of political society that through its political leadership include (or *articulate* using Tuğal’s
terminology) social movements and organizations and creates a discourse of *authority* and *political unity* legitimizing itself as hierarchical and at the same time encompassing the wholeness of the society through the expression of citizenship and community, embedding itself among the civil society. In the case of Turkey, its manifestation is the

> AKP that has creatively blended Islam, tradition, supernaturalism,
> charisma and informality \[..\] to build an Islamic modernity
> [@tugal_passive_2009 pg 22].

Hegemony is defined as a process of articulating everyday life, spaces and economic relations by a certain leadership to create consent about its dominant position. Civil society, i.e. associations, social movements and informal networks that regulate everyday life, has to be linked to the state in this articulation to make possible the establishment of the consent that is at the basis of the hegemonic discourse. This connection is achieved by the political sphere, its immanency being at the intersection between civil society and state and by the discourse of citizenship used to legitimate the state’s apparatuses and hierarchies. The articulation between these three spheres has as its goal to subordinate state agencies to political control, and therefore at least partly to civil society. The degrees of overlapping between these actors have different consequences in the kind of regime that comes out as a result, the possibility of a democratic outcome is only one of them. Since the segmentation of civil society can lead to the inclusion of only a part of it in the hegemonic discourse, the result of this articulation can also be a populist and autocratic regime.

Labour union’s embeddedness with the civil society and other social movements has been studied on a cross country basis to search correlations with democratic governance. The result of this analysis is
a strong positive relation between Government transparency, efficiency and response to citizen’s demands to the degree of connection between unions and civic organizations. Conversely:

> when unions are disconnected from middle-class and community based
> associations, the entire working class, or at least a segment of it is
> more likely to be co-opted by the state or the ruling block
> underpinned by either the landlord or capitalist class \[..\] the
> quality of state institution will be more likely to deteriorate under
> these circumstances [@lee_labor_2007 pg 605].

Under particular conditions some sectors of the civil society can be merged to the state, giving birth to populist, autocratic or totalitarian regimes. This co-optation can be a reaction to an *organic
crisis* with which the hegemony changes its articulation to include new agent(s) to reiterate itself under changed and challenging circumstances. In this light we can argue that the historical development of corporatism and weak trade unions in Turkey can have played a major role in the lack of cohesion between civil society’s organizations and that this precondition allowed the co-opting of the Hak-Iş and MEMUR-SEN (or the Gülen movement) as part of this inclusion process.
