---
author:
- Marco Rizzoli
bibliography:
- 'bibliocshs506.bib'
date: 'January 14, 2013'
title: 'The Role of Labour Unions in Turkey’s Passive Revolution'
...

Introduction
============

The significant role of social movements in the democratization
discourse is due to their ability to play the role of watchdog regarding
the activities of the government, thus the ability to reveal governance
practices not compatible to the rule of law and to manage dissent. The
degree of organizational solidarity between the actors of the civil
sphere is a main factor in predicting their relative strength and
therefore its freedom of acting and confronting the state and political
sphere. The pivotal role of labour unions in coordinating and improving
the interrelations between social movements is mainly due to their
organizational peculiarities and access to resource. As mass movements
of workers, unions have the possibility to influence directly the
productive sector and therefore ability to exercise leverage on the
government of a country or the ownership of an enterprise through formal
and informal means like strikes and collective bargaining, the
possibility to organize collective protests and public manifestations of
dissent represent forms of pacific resistance against state coercion.
Moreover the role in conveying labour force to the formal sector of
economy and diverting dissent in legal and peaceful protests is a
prerogative of well established unions that can boost the overall
performance of a country preventing (or at least limiting) informal
employment that avoiding taxation and state’s control on the enterprises
drain the state’s finances. On the other hand the formal enrolling of
workers and the collective bargaining practice raise security on the
workplaces by forcing the employers to adhere to standards and
collective contracts that also guarantee an higher income and more
social security.

The role of the unions in including the subordinate workers in the civil
society sphere allow them to participate in the dialectics with the
political sphere as a collective unity then increasing their relative
power in the creation of new hegemonic discourses encompassing broader
sectors of the society. The structure of its internal democratic
organization with the election of worker’s representatives both as part
of the union and in factory’s assemblies strengthen the political
awareness of their members and can induce them getting involved in
political activities also out of the union. Defending interests and
rights of the lower income subordinate workers has as a goal the
narrowing of economic differences between different strata of the
population thus promoting social justice and further self awareness of
the subordinate classes.

The main traits conventionally used to define a state-like structure are
its autonomy and differentiation from other organizations acting on the
same territory, its centralized and formally coordinated structure and
its monopolistic control of the means of coercion and extraction. It is
also differentiated from the Nation since this is one of the means of
centralization that can be part of a state and used to convey its
legitimization on its subjects. The characteristic that distinguish a
Nation is that its legitimizing discourse is based on a sense of
commonality in the population, sharing same cultural values, language
and history. These traits can be pre-existent to the state or infused in
the subjects after the state crafting to legitimize the same existence
of the political unity. So a Nation can be a consequence of a state
making process but its not necessarily the only one [@Tilly1975 pg 70].

Since we have conceptualized the state making as a process of imposing
one organization’s structure over a territory, the means with which it
imposes and legitimize its presence are the main characteristic that
distinguish between different kind of regimes, from democracy to
dictatorship. The role of civil organizations and social movements in
the realization of “full” democracies and its correlations between civil
freedoms are directly linked to the necessity for an autonomous
condition of the civil society sphere. It is recognized that in cases of
direct influence of state or political sphere in the social movements by
funding, sponsorships or providing ideological basis, the outcome can
lead to Dictatorial forms, like in Italy and Germany before the 2nd
World War but also it can contribute to the formation of strong
patronage regimes when state’s leaders achieve to co-opt informal actors
[@Vine1980].

In the practice of state crafting [@Tilly1975] there are counteracting
factors that can challenge the establishment of a hegemonic discourse.
Studies in developing countries in Africa [@Vine1980] and ex-soviet
Union [@Tilly2005; @Marat2006] recognize the presence of a strong
informal sector of the economy as part of the forces that challenge the
centralization and monopolization of the political and economic sphere,
actors in the para legal or illegal sectors of economy can achieve to
build important relation networks parallel to the state, one possible
outcome of this situation is the absorption of these actors in the
state’s structure (as happened in Tajikistan) or successfully substitute
the “official” government in the areas/regions were it lacks the
strength necessary to impose its presence (as partially happened in
Kyrgyzstan). These processes are most studied in developing countries
because of the higher visibility they have during state building and
nation building processes . Similarities to these situation, though, can
be recognized as a consequence of the so called withdrawal of the state
along the introduction of neoliberalist practices and theories also in
well established states. Following the main points outlined in the
“Washington Consensus” paper the privatization of important sectors of
Welfare Systems and strategic resources that before belonged to the
state introduced new actors in political and economical sphere. The
intrusion of informal networks based on clientelism substituting the
state in providing social security can be a serious challenge to
democracy when the actors are involved in shady activities.

Social movements are seen as main players in the process of
democratization and nation building [@Tilly2005; @Ekiert1998](even if in
many cases it would be better to refer to state crafting), in this paper
I will focus on the role of labour unions in contrasting the development
of a strong informal sector by their mediation between the players
(workers and enterprises) and how this can prevent the dismemberment of
state’s role along the application of neoliberalist discourses.
Therefore my question is what is the role of labour unionism as a player
in society’s resistance to the commodification of labour market and in
maintaining a legal basis on the relations between enterprises and
workers. In the specific case of Turkey I will try to understand if the
lack of strong unionism and integration between social movements allowed
the co-optation of part of the Islamic civil society in the redefinition
of the hegemonic discourse exercised by the political sphere in what
accordingly to Cihan Tuğal was a passive revolution.

Shaping Contemporary Turkish Unionism
=====================================

The history of labour unions in Turkey can be traced back to the early
years of 19th century, usually took the shape of mutual benefit
institutions organizing among different professions mostly in state
owned companies and with strong ties with socialist movements. Long
hiatuses characterized the evolution and shaped the contemporary
conditions of unionism in Turkey, the first one was between 1925 with
the ban of all the political activities and led to the single party
regime up to 1946. Another distinctive trait of labour unionism is the
tendency to be organized under umbrella institutions strongly tied to
the government, like was stated in the Associations Act of 1938 that was
shaped on Mussolini’s corporatism and prohibited class based
associations [@AslanF.andBaydar1998]. The contrasts between CHP, labour
movements and socialist parties lasted for all the 1940s, and reached
its peak after 1946, when with the re-establishment of unions and
socialist parties that followed the end of the single party regime the
government again closed all of them under the martial law. A new Act
regulating labour and political associations was promulgated in 1947,
that, although allowing the establishment of unions, prohibited
protesting through strikes. In the following years the role of the
unions grew constantly both in the number of members and in acts of
protests, even declaring illegal strikes.

The Democrat Party, who came to power in 1950 and was driven by a market
oriented ideology, established new close relations with the U.S. and
applied for the membership in the NATO, and in 1952 one of the main
actors that shaped unionism in Turkey was founded. Turk Iş took the
shape of an umbrella corporation meant to prevent the formation of
strong class based associations of workers, strongly tied with the U.S.
who were funding it from the very beginning. Clientelistic relations
with the leading party also developed, with union members that were
granted parliamentary seats or prominent positions in public offices
[@Nichols2004 pg 145]. After the military coup of 1960, a new
constitution was signed with the granting of the basic freedom for the
labour unions to act, followed by slight limitations that prohibited
solidarity, political and general strikes. The main unions that are
still active in contemporary Turkey were formed in this period. The
success of collective protests organized by DISK, born by unions seceded
from Turk Iş, increased the strength of worker’s movements and raised
the members of the union through all the 1970s up to the point to be
comparable in terms of overall membership and even more effective
regarding the number of working hours affected by the protests
[@Nichols2004 pg 148].

The situation, though, worsened with the economic and political crises
that led to the military coup of 1980, who, first banned all the
federate and independent unions and then, in 1983, promulgated the new
Trade Unions Act. Heavily restrictive measures meant to prevent the
engagement of worker’s organizations in political activities and
protests were adopted. The prohibition of collective bargaining in the
public sector, general strikes and the possibility for the government to
delay or deny the permission for claimed strikes in case of emergency
circumstances (obviously to be defined by the government itself) were
some of the reforms introduced. Also new rules regarding application and
registration for membership were established with a long and cumbersome
procedure to comply to not to be refused by the Ministry of Labour, this
procedure also implied expensive registrations certified by a Notary
Public. The same rules were applied to resign from a union, and are
especially effective in preventing the draining of members from
accommodating unions, like for example the case of Turk Iş branch in the
metallurgical sector (Türk Metal) were the joining procedure to the
union is part of the process of joining the company [@Nichols2004 pg
175]. Moreover the ban on the labour unions actually affected mostly the
DISK, since the other two major unions were allowed again to operate
soon after the coup, Turk Iş after few months and Hak-Iş (Islamic
Federation) in 1981.

Even after the DISK was again in existence it faced the draining out of
its former members and the imprisonment of its cadres, seriously mining
the effectiveness of the union because of the law ruling the possibility
to participate in collective bargaining who was extremely restrictive,
allowing only the unions representing at least 50% plus one of the
employees in the workplace and 10% nationwide in the sector to be part
of the negotiation. The main unions in the private sector in
contemporary Turkey are:

#### Turk Iş

Founded in 1952 with the intention

> to establish new unions in those branches where no unions existed, to
> amalgamate the different unions in the same branch in each province,
> to combine trade unions in federations, to strive for the amendment of
> the Labour Code so as to cover all working people employed in
> industry, agriculture, commerce or elsewhere and to advocate the
> recognition of the right to strike to all workers.

[@AslanF.andBaydar1998] Has since its very foundation been strictly
intertwined with the government and the TISK (the confederation of
Turkish’ employers) as testified by many of its members who were elected
in the parliament or appointed to government offices, explicitly
admitted the funding from the U.S. and governmental sources during the
4th congress held in Ankara in November 1960. After the military coup in
the ’80s, when was facing the challenge of the DISK, was the only union
allowed to operate. As a consequence of its support to the military
regime and the participation of its general secretary as a Minister of
Labour it was expelled from the ICFTU (International Confederation of
Trade Unions). As of January 2009 is the biggest Turkish trade union
with 2,239,341 members recorded officially by the statistics of the
Ministry of Labour and Social Security [@AslanF.andBaydar1998]

#### DISK

Founded in the “golden age” of Turkish unionism (1960-1980) its core
members were also part of the socialist oriented Workers Party of Turkey
(TIP) and former members of Turk Iş, who during the strike in Pasabahce
glass factory in 1966 formally seceded from Kristal-Iş (the branch of
Turk Iş). The event that triggered the secession was the agreement with
the TISK made by the union’s leadership who passed over the head of the
workers involved in the protests. Gaining the support of other
confederate unions Kristal-Is members were able to resume the strike
against the agreements signed by the confederate leadership and as a
consequence were expelled. The sign on a new confederate treaty posed
the basis for the foundation of DISK. In the statement released to
explain the secession from the confederation it was claimed that

> Türk-Is had become unable to implement its own principles, allowed a
> readjustment of the regulations on industrial branches in breach of
> international norms, lost its national identity and could only survive
> with American help, that it pursued a placatory policy that hindered
> workers in attaining their rights, opposed all justified strikes and
> supported the foundation of employer- friendly unions against
> Maden-Is. They declared that a new confederation was necessary to
> coordinate the struggle of individual unions for the common interests
> of the working people. The sole income of the new confederation would
> be workers’ dues and donations, and it would aim the establishment of
> a system of equality and fraternity in the country.

.[@AslanF.andBaydar1998] DISK leaders faced numerous convictions and
trials in the early ’70s due to their autonomous position that let them
pursue aims like increasing women’s rights on the workplace, holidays
and civil rights. After the military coup in 1980 its leaders were again
arrested and the union was closed up until January 1992 when the 8th
general assembly was held, after that the union successfully joined
ICFTU and ETUC and participated in the Democratic Platform with the
other major unions. Nowadays DISK counts 426,232 members and is the
third Turkish union regarding the number of supporters.

#### Hak-Iş

Founded in 1976 and posing as a mediator between employers and workers,
Hak-Iş refuses communism, zionism and fascism and claim as its purpose
the establishment of harmonious relations in the workplace. Its religion
based ideology is well testified by the the mosque inside a crescent
drawn in its original symbol. After the military coup was one of the
first union who was allowed to function again in 1981. Its relations
with the National Salvation Party who governed as part of parliamentary
coalitions let this union gain the support of the public sector related
to the ministries under NSP’s control. In 1993 joined the Democratic
platform from which withdrew after the other unions opposed its proposal
to participate in the privatization of state owned enterprises on the
basis that if they were to be sold they should have be in the hands of
the workers. In 1997 joined ICTFU and ETUC. In 2009 it counted 431,550
members and was the second union in Turkey.

The main feature of unionism in Turkey was the constant attempt by the
government to embed worker’s organization into the state apparatus in a
corporate fashion, with strong reactions when the less restrictive law
on Trade Union regulations and civil freedoms allowed the formation of
links between social movements. What happened after the ’60s and ’70s
“golden age” with the military coup in 1980 that disbanded all the
independent organization is one example. The strong ties with the
government and employers can therefore be considered at the basis for
the actual predominance of the Turk Iş. Its collusion with the state and
employers and the ongoing clientelistic practices in its internal
hierarchy in conjunction with legal constrains that effectively limit
labour unions’ ability to operate can partially explain the contemporary
disaffection of the workers.

Effectiveness of Unions in Contemporary Turkey
==============================================

The first half of the ’90s witnessed a general resurgence of union
activity and protests, thanks to the less restrictive laws and to the re
establishment of previously banned organizations like DISK. Also the
three main unions representing public servants were founded. This is
well reflected in the results of the World Values survey that in the
aggregated table of the years between 1990 and 2001 records a cumulative
45,5% of positive answers (“quite a lot” and “great deal”) regarding
people’s opinion on unionism and in the increasing number of
participants in strikes that reached its peak in 1995 [@Nichols2004 pg
155]. Also the Democratic Platform was formed in 1993 conveying all the
major unions’ efforts in unified collective bargaining. A general
tendency of decreasing in confidence in effectiveness and importance of
labour unions in affecting workers’ conditions is then recorded
beginning with 2002 with an overall drop to 38,5% in the above mentioned
positive answers to the World Values survey in 2007.

This overall tendency is paralleled by the decreasing application of
collective bargaining for contracts, with the decline from 46.9% of
workers covered in 1985 to 18.3% in 2004 [@Dinler2012 pg 10].This
numbers also reflect the consequences of the Labour Law promulgated in
2003 in which fixed term and part time labour form were
institutionalized, thus preventing the need to use collective contracts
signed by accommodating unions to employ flexible labour force. With
this new law the application of more favourable conditions is then
delegated to the collective bargaining carried out by the trade unions.
The segmentation of labour force through the practice of subcontracting
and job agencies that act as intermediaries between workers and
employers poses another challenge to the labour unions in the sense that
it is often difficult and cumbersome to understand which contract is
applicable to the worker since there is a remarkable variation of the
possible contexts of subcontracting thus leaving the workers in a sort
of contractual limbo.

It is worth noticing that the laws regulating labour unions were the
same approved under the military regime and lasted for 30 years. Just on
October 18, 2012 a new law was promulgated which lowers the sector
threshold to participate in collective bargaining to 3%, but keeps the
workers’ representativeness in the workplace at 50% and the ban to
general, political and solidarity strikes. Moreover it removes the
payment for workers who are dismissed for joining a union in case of
enterprises with less than 30 employees or for workers employed for less
than 6 months. In conjunction with the lack of a maximum number of
consequent term contracts this can leave the workers hired with the new
regulations without protection. Public servants were allowed to organize
in unions only after 1995 and in specific case like for judges and
policemen it is still forbidden, the recognition of collective
bargaining was ratified in 2010, and only disputes on income are
allowed. The decisions are to be taken between a Commission of public
employers and a Central Commission of employees made of seven members
appointed from the main unions accordingly to the rate of membership. It
is not clear if the decisions are to be made with the majority of votes
or it is sufficient the President’s approval, moreover since four out of
six members plus the president are appointed from the most
representative union (now the MEMUR-SEN, the closest to the government)
the internal democracy of the Commission and subsequently the effective
representativeness of public servants is strongly debatable.

Accordingly to the report drafted by ITUC in February 2012 [@ITUC2012],
even if Turkey has ratified the eight core Labour Conventions, the
country still doesn’t comply with the agreements signed. Regarding the
case of workers’ and unions’ rights is stated that harassment against
unionised workers is present in the workplaces and discrimination
practices also with the use of violence are not enough discouraged by
the existing laws and their application. Among the cases reported the
most striking are those regarding judicial harassment:

> Several trade unions have faced criminal charges under false or vague
> allegation, including setting up “terrorist organizations”.

many of them were sentenced to prison under these accusations, like 25
KESK members of Kurdish origins who were charged for “intellectual
support to terrorist organizations” and convicted for 6.5 years, or the
case of the union leader of KESK’s teachers branch who was threatened of
dismissal after he denounced the use of child workers in Şanliurfa.
Dismissals after unionisation in factories are common practice along
with the forced shift to join more malleable and accommodating unions
(or none at all) under the threat of mass firings and relocation of
structures.

Islamic Unionism and Turkey’s Passive Revolution 
=================================================

The changes in Hak-Iş policy and members composition can be emblematic
of the processes that affected Islamic based social movements after the
1980 military coup. From its beginning this labour union focused on the
religious basis of its ideology, in strong contrast with the other
unions it posed itself in the position of offering a peaceful
confrontation between employers and employees who are seen as part of
the same Islamic community therefore should act in harmony. During the
military regime this union soon supported the government and its
synthesis of Turkish and Islamic cultures and gained the possibility to
start again its activism as early as the beginning of 1981. Since now
the main goals of the Islamic union were to establish a brotherhood
between workers and enterprises, and its main claim in the negotiations
were about the creation of spaces dedicated to the prayers or to gain
days off for pilgrimages. The turning point of the movement and the
beginning of its inclusion into the dominant position can be traced soon
after the end of the military regime.

In the 4th assembly of the Hak-Iş union its new leader Necati Çelik,
elected in 1983, detached the union’s position from the Welfare Party,
born from the ashes of its former ally MNP who was banned by the
military, and the idea of an Islamic community as the basis to lead
negotiations by deleting the article about employer-employees
brotherhood from the statute in 1986 [@Duran2005]. The new direction
enhanced the appeal of Hak-Iş also among the workers who were member of
DISK before its ban and in many cases they joined the union. Ironically,
and obviously thanks to the ongoing ban on DISK, the once conservative
and religious Hak-Iş during the late ’80s was substituting the role of
the more leftist union in Turkey’s labour force imagery. This change is
further testified by the new symbol which incorporated also a flywheel
along the crescent. With the expansion of its members composition also
its goals begun to widen, for example supporting the claims for the
improvement of civil rights and democratization, and it took a further
shift to more “traditional” union practices by organizing a general
strike in 1991 and participating in the celebration of the Labour Day on
the 1st of May of the same year. In the same period Hak-Iş assembly
added the words “secularism” and “democracy” to its statute with the
goal to obtain an international recognition by the ICFTU and ETUC,
achieving both of them in 1997. This interest in international relations
also modified drastically its position about the admission of Turkey in
the European Union beginning an active support for the integration. The
syncretism between Islamic values and unionist practices took a shape
more similar to Islamic charities than to a traditional labour union in
Hak-Iş policy by providing social services to workers like health and
child care. Also its way to deal with the privatization of state’s
factories by buying them in the attempt to develop a model of employee
ownership (in the shape of cooperatives) was an unconventional way to
face the establishment of market hegemony. In this sense the
transformations undertook by Hak-Iş after the military coup and the
first introduction on neoliberalism in Turkey shaped it in the way of
universal provisionism, encompassing all the spheres of social welfare
that once belonged to the state:

> Hak-Iş might be considered the forerunner of the Muslim democratic
> leaning of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), which voices
> strong statements about the expansion of the sphere of politics
> regarding freedoms and human rights. AKP’s intention of joining
> European Union is again in parallel with Hak-Iş’s European
> inclinations [@Duran2005 pg 242]

Conclusion
==========

After the military coup of 1980 and the introduction of neoliberalism
the aim of Islamic associations, networks and parties shifted to the
realization of the concept of integral religion, an all-encompassing
Islam, regulating people’s lives, trying to institute alternative
lifestyles, places and economic relations. The same transformation in
the political discourse of the Hak-Iş in conjunction with the declining
role of unionism during late ’90’s can be read as part of an attempted
adaptation to the application of neoliberalist theories and the
subsequent commodization of everyday life that established intertwined
relations between market needs and the state through the political
sphere and realized in the workplaces in the form of *market despotism*.

Paraphrasing Tuğal’s words[@Tugal2009], how was possible that liberal
neoconservatism appropriated bits and pieces of Islamic political
society and civil society after 2002 to reinstitute the linkages of
economy, civil society, political society and the state, and had as an
outcome the absorption into the AKP of Islamist cadres and strategies?

In Tuğal’s interpretation the main actor in passive revolution’s
reconstruction of hegemony is the sphere of political society that
through its political leadership include (or *articulate* using Tuğal’s
terminology) social movements and organizations and creates a discourse
of *authority* and *political unity* legitimizing itself as hierarchical
and at the same time encompassing the wholeness of the society through
the expression of citizenship and community, embedding itself among the
civil society. In the case of Turkey, its manifestation is the

> AKP that has creatively blended Islam, tradition, supernaturalism,
> charisma and informality \[..\] to build an Islamic modernity
> [@Tugal2009 pg 22].

Hegemony is defined as a process of articulating everyday life and
spaces and economic relations by a certain leadership to create consent
for the domination and inequality under the same leadership. Civil
society as made of the associations, movements and informal networks
that regulate everyday life has to be linked to the state in the
articulation to make possible the establishment of the consent that is
at the basis of the hegemonic discourse. This connection is made
possible by the political society, its immanency being at the
intersection between civil society and state in the discourse of
citizenship to legitimate the state’s apparatuses. The articulation
between these three spheres has in its goal to subordinate state
agencies to political control, and therefore at least partly to civil
society. The degrees of overlapping between these actors have different
consequences in the kind of regime that comes out as the result of the
articulation, and the possibility of a democratic outcome is only one of
them, since the segmentation of civil society can lead to the inclusion
only of part of it in the hegemony also populist and autocratic regimes
can be the result of this articulation.

Labour union’s embeddedness with the civil society and other social
movements has been studied on a cross country basis to search
correlations with democratic governance. The result of this analysis is
a strong positive relation between Government transparency, efficiency
and response to citizen’s demands and the degree of the connection
between unions and civic organizations. Conversely:

> when unions are disconnected from middle-class and community based
> associations, the entire working class, or at least a segment of it is
> more likely to be co-opted by the state or the ruling block
> underpinned by either the landlord or capitalist class \[..\] the
> quality of state institution will be more likely to deteriorate under
> these circumstances [@Lee2007 pg 605].

Under particular conditions some sectors of the civil society can be
merged to the state in the formation of populist, autocratic or
totalitarian regimes, this co-optation can be a reaction to an *organic
crisis* with which the hegemony changes its articulation to include new
agent(s) to reiterate itself under changed circumstances. In the light
we can argue that the historical development of corporatism and weak
trade unions in Turkey can be a major factor causing the lack of
cohesion between civil society’s organizations and that this
precondition allowed the co-opting of the Hak-Iş and MEMUR-SEN (or the
Gülen movement) as part of this inclusion process.
